Chapters 1 & 2 Revisions 05-02-2025 (#5113)
dfinity/motoko: doc/md/fundamentals/2-types/10-options-results.md

`username` is an optional [`Text`](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/motoko/base/Text) value that starts as `null` (no username set).

:::info Null semantics

> `null` is only valid as a value of the trivial `Null` type or an optional type (`?T`). This makes it similar to `None` in languages like Rust, Scala, and `Nothing` in Haskell. In all these languages, the type system also enforces explicit handling of missing values.

Reviewer: ````suggestion
The constant `null` is the only value of the trivial `Null` type.  It also indicates an absent value in an optional type (`?T`). This makes `null` similar to `None` in languages like Rust, Scala, and `Nothing` in Haskell, and Motoko's option `?T` type similar to `Option<T>` in Rust, `Option[T]` in Scala, and `Maybe T` in Haskell.  In all these languages the type system enforces explicit handling of missing values by using a dedicated type to indicate optionality.

When a Motoko value has type `?T`, then is either `null` or some value, written `?value` (note leading `?`). The fundamental way to access the value is to use a `switch` expression, that explicitly handles both cases:

``` motoko
func displayName(option : ?Text) : Text {
  switch option {
     case ?user { user };
     case null { "Guest" };
  }
}
```

Sometimes, the verbosity of switch expression can make code harder to read, so Motoko also offers additional ways to handle option types.
````

let displayName = Option.get(username, "Guest"); // "Guest" if username is null
```

> Then same functionality can be achieved using `let-else`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The same functionality can be achieved using `let-else`:
```

let result2 = safeDivide(10, 0); // null
```

### Let / else

> To safely extract values from options, use the `let ... else` pattern. This is often preferred and encoraged over nested `switch` expressions when a fallback is needed, as it improves readability and ensures fallbacks are handled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another way to extract values from options, is use the `let ... else` pattern. This may be preferable over a `switch` expression, but only applies when the `else` expression can divert control elsewhere when the value fails to match the pattern used in the `let`.
```

assert get(null, "B") == "B";
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `let` matches option against the pattern `?value`, extracting any contents from `option`. If `option` is `null`, the pattern fails to match, and the `else` branch is entered, exiting the function with `defaultValue`.
```

Using a switch, we could have implemented this as:

``` motoko
func get<T>(option : ?T, defaultValue : T) : T {
  switch option {
    case null defaultValue;
    case (?value) value;
  }
};
```
This is a little longer but also increases the nesting of the code that needs to use `value`.

::: tip

Although convenient for option patterns, `let-else` also works with other types of pattern,
handling pattern-match failure using the `else` branch.

:::

> ### Unwrapping an option

Reviewer: This section is probably redundant now. Also its inconsistent since the example use let-else, but the text is explaining switch.

```motoko no-repl
func greetResult(resultName : Result<Text, Text>) : Text {
  let #ok(name) = resultname else return #err("No Name")
};
assert(greetResult(#ok("Motoko")) == "Hello, Motoko!");
assert(greetResult(#err("404 Not Found")) == "No name");

> ```

Reviewer: This example is bit weird since it takes a `Result` as an argument. 
Maybe just do safeDivide with a Result?
``` motoko
func safeDivide(a : Int, b : Int) : Result<Int,Text> {
    if (b == 0) (#err "Division by 0"  else (#ok (a / b));
}

let result1 = safeDivide(10, 2); // #ok 5
let result2 = safeDivide(10, 0); // #err "Division by 0"
```

> 

Reviewer: Maybe mention the Result library and say that it provide similar utility functions to Option.get, map etc (without going into details).
